# getting_cleaning_data
Repository for Coursera's Getting and Cleaning Data course's final project.
Author: Daniel K. Franch

## Contents:
* README.md: This file.
* run_analysis.R: R script that will implement the required processes (more on that below).
* tidyData.txt: Contains the tidy data generated by the script in the format required by the project.
* features_info.txt: File from the original data set from UCI's Machine Learning Repository explaining the variable's names.
* codebook.pdf: Codebook that describes the process of obtaining the tidy data set.
    
##Explanations:
To obtain the required data set, run_analysis.R should be run. It starts by 
verifying if there is already a data directory in the working directory and
creates it if there is not. Then it verifies if the raw data has already been
downloaded because the file size is considerably large and there is no need to 
download it every time the script is run.

Once the files are there, the script will read the tables containing the
information pertaining to the training and test data sets. For each of these 
sets there are 3 tables to be read. One contains the actual measurements, the
other two are just one column that indicates to which activity and which test
subject the measurements in each row pertain. These 2 columns will be binded to
the matrix of measurements for each set. Then these two sets will be "stacked"
together. As the measured variables are the same for both sets, it simply joins
the rows of one to the other in sequence.

The next step will be reading the file which contains the names of each measured
variable and then substitute the column names by their proper name. No change
was made from the variable names described in features.txt as their names seemed
to be pretty logical. The file features_info.txt contains the explanation of
such logic. It will be downloaded again once the script is run, but it was
included in this repository in case one wishes to get acquainted with the 
variables before running the script.

After this, the data set will be ordered by activity number. The file contaning
the coding of the activities' names will be read and a the data set will have
the activities' numbers substituted by their corresponding name.

This data frame will be filtered and eliminate all columns (variables) that are
not the mean value or standard deviation of a measured quantity. Variables such
as angles that depend on the mean of another value were not kept as they were
not seen as the mean value of a measured quantity.

Finally, work will start in generating the final tidy data set. The current data
set will be looped and auxiliary data frames will be generated containing just
one activity. This data frame will then be grouped by test subject and the 
mean of each column will be taken by test subject. One such data frame will be 
generated for each activity and then they will be binded together to form the
final tidy data set.

This data set is tidy as each column represents the mean value for each measured
quantity for each test subject performing one of the activities. Each row will
represent the values for one pair of activity and test subject. The variable 
names were not changed to represent that they are the mean value, as it would 
make them not clear to read. This distinction is made in the codebook.
